# Sorta.Net

Sorta is a visualization tool that helps developers visualize their (comparison-based) sorting algorithms. The project is splitted into frontend (work in progress) and backend, connected via a shared API schema. The backend API can be implemented in various languages, so that developers can practice and visualize sorting algorithms using their favourate language. This repository is the C# implementation of Sorta.

## What it does

This project is an API that exposes 2 endpoints:

- `GET /` returns a list of all implemented sorting algorithms, as well as their urls. For example:
```json
{
    "Bubble Sort": "https://localhost:12345/api/bubble-sort",
    "Selection Sort": "https://localhost:12345/api/selection-sort",
    "Quick Sort": "https://localhost:12345/api/quick-sort"
    // ......
}
```

- `GET /{algorithm}?data={data}` Will send the `data` (comma separated int list) to the server to be sorted using the named algorithm (one of the urls got above, for example). The server will sort the data using the algorithm, and will respond with statistics for that sort, as well as a list of steps which provides a mechanism for the frontend to visualize the sorting process. For example, the following response is returned when querying `GET /quick-sort?data=5,4,3,2,1`:
```json
{
    "unsorted":[5,4,3,2,1], // original data
    "sorted":[1,2,3,4,5],   // sorted data
    "hasCompleted":true,    // whether the sorting has completed
                            // this can be false if the algorithm generates too many steps and exceeds the limit
    "copies":33,            // number of copies happened
    "variables":1,          // number of extra variables used
    "comparisons":10,       // number of comparisons made
    "swaps":11,             // number of swaps made
                            // one swap will also contribute to 3 copies (t = a, a = b, b = t)
                            // the first time a swap happens it will increment the count of extra variables by 1
                            // to account for the temp variable used
    "length":5,             // length of data
    "steps":[               // a list of operations made, used for visualizing
        {"type":"Compare","from":1,"to":0}, // compare data[0] with data[1]
        {"type":"Swap","from":1,"to":1},    // swap data[1] with data[1]
        {"type":"Compare","from":2,"to":0}, 
        {"type":"Swap","from":2,"to":2},
        {"type":"Compare","from":3,"to":0},
        {"type":"Swap","from":3,"to":3},
        // ...... more steps ignored
        {"type":"Swap","from":2,"to":2}
    ]
}
```

## How it works

The project aims to provide an unobstrusive way to generate stats and steps. To achieve this, the sorting algorithms run sortings against an `ISortContext` object. This object provides methods for manipulate the underlying int array (e.g. `.Copy(int from, int to)`, `.Swap(int from, int to)`, etc). It also provides a mechanism to create temporary variable, so that the comparisons and copies against these variable do not escape from our statistics.

## Add your own algorithms

It is easy to add your own sorting algorithms. To do so, simply add a class that implements the `IAlgorithm` interface, which requires one method `void Sort(ISortContext context)`, and one property `string Algorithm { get; }` that represents the name of the algorithm.

Then, just pretend the `context` object is the array that you sort against, and implement `Sort`. In order for the statistics to be accurate, please use the methods provided by this object to do any comparisons, copies, swaps, as well as temporary variables creation. You can have a look at the existing algorithms to get a better idea of how to use them.

Once this class has been implemented, it will be automatically discovered and registered to the API. No further ado!

Hope you enjoy playing with this toy, and I am currently working on the frontend which creates animations based on the steps generated by this API. It will be real fun when that is completed!